Welcome back to Movie Recaps.
Today I will show you a sci-fi film from 2018,
titled Aniara.
Spoilers ahead!
Watch out and take care.
The ANIARA is an interplanetary spaceship
meant to take humans to the terraformed Mars
because the environmental collapse of Earth
has made the planet barely habitable.
The effects of this crisis happening in the
distant future can be seen both on land and
on the human population traveling off-world
in search of a better life.
The vessel works as an all-encompassing traveling
hotel, which has everything one can possibly
imagine, from restaurants and malls to spas,
pools, and nightclubs.
As the captain would later reflect, it's their
own little planet they have built inside of
a spaceship.
In fact, as you will discover, every aspect
of the ship is meant to mirror life on Earth,
both literally and symbolically.
The main character whose experience we will
follow on the ANIARA is a Mimaroben or MR
for short.
A Mimaroben is a person that works in a special
part of the ship - the Mima - that is meant
to give people an escape from the realities
of their current situation and virtually whisk
them away into a time when the Earth wasn't
destroyed.
The technology is so potent that everyone
who steps inside the Mima room instantly falls
into a kind of daze that can only be avoided
by proper training to gain focus and control
over its effects.
MR has had such training, but she can still
use the benefits of Mima and lose herself
inside it for a brief moment of surrender
before her shift begins.
The Astronomer is one of the side characters
in the film that will reflect its darker themes
more directly later on, but for now, she explains
how the passengers can expect their journey
on the ANIARA to look like for the next three
weeks.
The passengers are led into their rooms by
the personnel and aided to strap into their
beds until the gravitational load has adapted
to the vessel's cruising speed.
MR will be sharing a bunk bed with the Astronomer
for what is to be a routine voyage for the
two of them.
The beginning of the first hour on the ANIARA
goes on without a hitch.
Some of the passengers have gathered before
the Mima to enjoy its effects, though, not
many are interested in them for the moment.
MR takes the passengers inside the Mima room
and explains how it works.
The Mima's control over one's consciousness
becomes more intense as one stays in its proximity.
MR uses one of the passengers, Chebeba, to
show the rest what they can expect to see
once the full effects of Mima have entered
their minds, as well as their memories, and
she does it through a tiny monitor device.
Suddenly, the ANIARA experiences a critical
hit that pretty much destroys its propulsion
systems.
The command bridge tries to do some damage
control by ejecting the fuel so they don't
explode, while the pilot, Isagel, observes
how their course has been dramatically altered
because of the accident.
Some of the systems on the ship come back
online, but the trouble with ANIARA is only
just beginning as the captain will soon inform
everyone on board.
The crucial information that the captain shares
with the passengers and everyone else is that
they no longer have control of the ship and
to get back on course they will have to wait
for a celestial body to use its gravity and
slingshot back on track.
However, since they don't know when they will
be able to do that, the journey to Mars will
be prolonged from three weeks to a couple
years which naturally, doesn't bode well with
the passengers.
To illustrate how some handle the news, we
see a woman in the next scene, Libidel, being
dragged into Mima by MR to calm her awful
panic attack.
Chebeba is there to help, but she checks out
fast as well.
It's week three since the accident and things
seem superficially calm on board the ANIARA.
The passengers find different ways to escape
their daily realities on the ship, so Mima
also gets many more visitors than before.
Realizing this new influx of customers, MR
wants to speak to the captain so that he could
assign more people to the Mima to help her
out.
She gets stressed as well and can't sleep
so she goes to the pool to relax where Isagel
goes to do the same.
MR is attracted to Isagel but doesn't know
how to approach her yet.
When she gets back to her room she has an
illuminating conversation with the Astronomer,
who tells her something she probably would've
been better off not knowing.
The old woman, in a very dry, matter-of-fact
fashion, tells MR that they will not be coming
in close contact with a celestial body any
time soon.
In fact, she's sure the captain is aware of
that as well, but he's keeping the information
from the others to avoid the negative reaction
it can produce.
MR also has trouble handling the fact that
they are doomed to drift in the vastness of
space for an indefinite amount of time, even
though, unlike most of the others, she has
no one waiting for her on Mars.
She panics and tries to find some comfort
in alcohol and Mima, lying down in the fetal
position and finally drifting off in the virtual
space of the device.
MR isn't the only one suffering panic attacks
as we can see in the next scene, where a passenger
has also found out the same truth from the
Astronomer.
While trying to calm him down so she can take
him to Mima, MR drops another devastating
truth about the hellish life conditions on
Mars which he, fortunately, doesn't hear because
his translator knows better than to share
it with him.
MR takes the passenger to the already full
Mima and finds him a spot next to the others
while also managing to grab the security guard
just before he can fall completely under its
control.
Sometime later, she finally gets to see the
captain to make her request for assistance
in Mima, telling him that she will need around
5-6 people that will also need to be trained
to resist Mima's images.
MR thinks that the influx of clients in Mima
will be even greater when the people find
out that they won't be able to turn back.
The captain agrees to grant her request and
tells her that the rest of the people will
be informed of the situation, once they get
used to eating the algae that will soon become
their only source of food.
After three years of drifting, the algae situation
on the ANIARA is causing a little bit of a
problem with the filtration systems on board.
The passengers are keeping it together somehow,
mostly by using Mima or other ways to divert
their attention away from their doomed state.
MR keeps falling more for Isagel, even though
she has one-night stands with men that mean
nothing to her.
She talks to the Astronomer about what she
feels for Isagel, but the woman just diverts
the conversation into a fatalistic and defeatist
acceptance of the human condition and all
its marginal nonsense like love.
In her worldview, their lives, their loves,
and the ANIARA are just as minuscule and meaningless
in the vastness of space, as the little bubble
of air in her whiskey glass.
MR tries to escape those ideas in the comfort
of Mima, but as she will soon discover, the
device itself is no better at dealing with
their predicament than the humans seeking
refuge in her delightful calm as it can be
seen in the horrible images of the birds disappearing
or dying.
The Mimaroben can't find what exactly is the
problem with the device as clients begin to
come in for a session.
MR welcomes all, but Mima begins unraveling
once again, spouting what seems like nonsense
and causing terrible nightmares in the clients.
MR sees the nightmares with her monitoring
device, first in one client, then in all of
them, and quickly calls quits to the session,
getting everyone out and not allowing anyone
in, regardless of how many have flocked to
enjoy the serenity of Mima.
We see Libidel again, very disappointed that
she won't get into Mima for a session.
MR gets a scolding from the captain for closing
down Mima, even though she reminds him that
it needs to rest, considering it can see and
feel everything that the passengers have gone
through.
The captain doesn't care for her explanations
because he wants to keep the new ecosystem
on the ship working and Mima is a great part
of that.
MR continues to work with Mima, jotting down
everything that the magical device states,
as a kind of therapy to let it get out its
innermost thoughts about the horrible visions
it has received of mankind.
Mima is on its very edge when people begin
to enter the room and don't respond to MR's
yells to get out.
Libidel stares into the dying device when
it explodes in what was probably a way to
end its own life and suffering.
In the next shot, we see MR who is not taking
Mima's death easily.
But neither is anyone else on the ship with
Libidel already spreading rumors about MR
and her involvement in Mima's demise.
Isagel goes to talk to the captain on MR's
behalf so that she doesn't get punished for
what happened, but since he needs a scapegoat
for his own wrongdoing, he's willing to accept
the rumors about MR as truth.
The captain taunts Isagel in their conversation,
prompting her to hit him, so she gets arrested.
And MR faces the same fate just some moments
later as the guards catch her in one of the
hallways of the ANIARA and beat her up quite
gruesomely before they take her in custody.
The fourth-year on the ANIARA rolls by and
things become truly dire.
Some of the people on board, in need of any
kind of meaning and reassurance, begin to
form cults, while others commit suicide in
ever-growing numbers.
Isagel and MR have gotten close during their
years of imprisonment and we can see them
now getting chosen to be part of the additional
staff of the ANIARA, tasked to maintain some
of the ship's most important systems and resources.
The two of them, however, get different directions,
with Isagel getting back to Logistics and
MR getting a teaching position.
They even get new lodgings together which
just strengthens their bond further.
When MR walks through the ship after her one-year
imprisonment, she can see how changed and
rugged it has become.
Just like the cult of science which MR is
now a part of as a teacher, the other more
nonsensical ones continue to grow on the ANIARA.
This is something that Isagel and MR find
out during a session in the spa when Chebeba
asks them to be a part of the Libidel and
the Libidellas cult.
MR rightfully thinks that they would want
to sacrifice her for killing Mima, but Chebeba
tells them her cult believes that Mima killed
herself out of grief.
In the next sequence of events, we see the
ritual to canonize Mima that begins innocuously
with the ceremonial painting of their faces
and a prayer for Mima.
Libidel leads the women of the cult into another
room where the men join them and opens the
floor for a ceremonial gathering.
The people of the Libidel cult have exchanged
the pleasure they would have received from
Mima for the pleasure they can now receive
from each other.
While MR is fully immersed in the experience,
Isagel doesn't seem too excited for it but
sleeps with one of the men nonetheless.
In the fifth year of ANIARA's endless journey,
Isagel and MR are expecting a baby but Isagel,
unlike MR, isn't happy about it, dispassionately
reflecting on their hellish predicament on
the ship.
In a bid to help Isagel and the others, MR
decides to build a beam-screen outside the
windows of the ANIARA to bring back the light
on the ship.
Sharing that idea with the Astronomer, who
has been in a constant drunken stupor for
the last couple of years, isn't the smartest
thing she could do.
The drunkard laughs at her, saying that she
wants to build a substitute for what itself
was a substitute.
That doesn't stop MR from trying to get to
the captain and share her ideas with him.
His reaction, while not as full of ridicule
as the Astronomer's, is a definite no, explaining
that her place as a teacher is infinitely
more important for the future generations
of the ship than that of a light beam, shielding
them from reality.
MR needs to grow up because her baby is on
its way too as can be seen in the next shot
of Isagel giving birth in their bathtub.
After the baby is born, Isagel's doesn't get
any better, in fact, she's probably suffering
from post-partum depression.
Taking a bath with the infant, Isagel is seen
holding it underwater for a bit longer than
she should, until she is called out to the
bridge.
MR joins them there and she finds out that
some kind of vessel is approaching the ANIARA.
Based on their observations, it is not a rescue
ship, regardless of what the rumors on board
might want to make it look like.
Isagel and the captain are of the impression
that the vessel might be a probe carrying
fuel and fuel rods for the ship.
Even Isagel is happy about that discovery.
The ANIARA rejoices about a future in which
they can restart their engines and turn back
home when the vessel arrives in a year or
so.
The sixth-year comes with a different attitude
and a different outlook on the ANIARA.
The crew is getting prepared to grab the incoming
vessel they see as their saving grace by performing
simulations with the ship's grappling hooks.
It's not a situation lacking in stress for
the commanding crew, considering how important
they see the mission, but at least the passengers
have some hope for the future.
The vessel approaches finally and the crew
instructs the passengers to get into their
cabins and lie down because they will be upping
the gravity on the ANIARA considerably so
they can slow it down and grab it.
The procedure starts with Isagel on the command
bridge.
The vessel comes close to the starship and
they engage the grappling hooks as everyone
waits in suspense.
They catch it successfully and reel it inside
the ANIARA with a whole team coming in to
inspect it.
The vessel turns out to be a complete mystery
to everyone.
In a briefing with the captain, one of the
younger engineers suggests that their methods
of investigating might actually be outdated,
while the second in command questions if they
should've even said that it was a rescue probe.
The captain, however, has an entirely different
outlook, primarily concerned with the psychological
wellbeing of the crew, noting how much their
motivation was umped when they heard about
the probe.
He even says that they should have lied it
was coming long before they actually saw one.
MR's and Isagel's child is growing up happily,
with two mothers who have found a new joy
in life because of what they expect the probe
to be.
However, that is soon to change when MR finds
the Astronomer drunk again at one of the bars
on the ship.
She knows about the probe and soon everyone
else will too.
However, the way they try to extract data
from the probe, nothing comes up with any
answers.
Luckily, the Astronomer is there to remind
everyone working on the probe to adopt a nihilistic
attitude as she has once again succumbed to.
In an ironic twist, the captain tells her
that she will be receiving an award for her
discovery since she was the first one to see
the probe on the telescopes.
He informs the rest of the people investigating
the probe that he will not be sharing their
lack of discoveries with anyone else and,
furthermore, the captain forbids them from
sharing it also.
The Astronomer aptly comments that they are
in a coffin hurling through space which angers
the captain enough to shoot her dead.
MR reads the eulogy during the Astronomer's
funeral and the motivation and happiness that
was felt by everyone before is seen leaving
their minds, just as the Astronomers body
is sent out to drift alone in space.
One might think that MR would take her death
the worst, doing hallucinogenic drugs with
her friends, but they aren't doing that great
either.
While the ANIARA is going through some kind
of space storm, MR goes dancing and falls
back to her old ways before she met and fell
for Isagel, leaving her alone in their room
with the baby.
The storm creates another problem on the ship,
whose effects are seen in a momentary turbulence,
with the aftermath of death reaching throughout
the entire ship.
Libidel dies during the space storm like many
others.
MR rushes into her quarters and finds Isagel
and the baby still alive, but not for long.
Isagel isn't doing very well.
Sometime later, the captain has at last given
MR the go-ahead to make her beam-screen outside
of the ship so she continues working, trying
haplessly to keep it together.
Isagel tries to be happy for her, but she
has other things on her mind.
She sees how happy MR is and tells her that
she admires her for keeping her hopes up.
After many years of darkness, MR finally gets
her beam-screen running outside of the ship.
She prances back happily to her room only
to be struck by the tragedy that has occurred
inside, of Isagel killing both herself and
their little child.
10 years later, the ANIARA is still operational,
but with fewer passengers and even less enthusiasm
than the previous years.
After one of the most depressing parties to
happen in deep space, the captain still pretends
like everything is fine even when he has begun
cutting himself, saying that the ANIARA is
a pioneering ship.
He calls MR on stage and gives her an honorary
medal for exemplary achievement for her beam,
but she isn't happy anymore, nor does she
care for the medal or the ship quite frankly.
Even the algae don't care anymore.
It is the 24th year since the ANIARA started
her journey into the unknown reaches of space,
devoid of all meaning, and some of the people
still persist.
However, they return to cultish and mystical
thinking, in their solemn surroundings.
Almost 6 million years have passed with the
ANIARA drifting in space when it finally arrives
at a celestial body.
No one is alive on board to witness it happening.